                                people  science  environment  partners




                                   FINAL REPORT
                               APRIL 2006 – JULY 2008

“Assessing the farm-level impact of genetically improved farmed
          tilapia (GIFT) in China and the Philippines”




                                 Project leader: Diemuth E. Pemsl

               Policy, Economics and Social Science Discipline (PESS)
                         WorldFish Center, Penang, Malaysia




  OFFICE Jalan Batu Maung, Batu Maung, 11960 Bayan Lepas, Penang, Malaysia  MAIL PO Box 500 GPO, 10670 Penang, Malaysia
  PHONE (+60-4) 626 1606  FAX (+60-4) 626 5530  EMAIL worldfishcenter@cgiar.org




                    formerly known as “ICLARM – The World Fish Center”               www.worldfishcenter.org

1. Name of IARC
The WorldFish Center (ICLARM)

2. Project Title
Assessing the farm-level impact of genetically improved farmed tilapia (GIFT) in China and the
Philippines

3. GTZ Project Number and Contract Number
Project Number: 04.7860.2-001.00     Contract Number: 81085673

4. Reporting Period
1 April 2006 – 31 July 2008

5. Project Coordinator (Leading Scientist)
Dr. Diemuth E. Pemsl                               d.pemsl@cgiar.org,            Ext. 192

Postal address:       WorldFish Center
                      GPO Box 500, 10670 Penang, Malaysia
                      Telephone:   +60(4)6202-Ext.
                      Fax:         +60(4)626 5530 (general)

6. Collaborating Institutions and Staff including NARS and German Partners

China
   Dr. Xu Pao                               Freshwater Fisheries Research Center (FFRC)
   Mr. Yuan Yongming                        Freshwater Fisheries Research Center (FFRC)
   Prof. Li Sifa                            Shanghai Fisheries University (SFU)
   Dr. Weidong Zhou                         WorldFish Center, China Office

Philippines
    Dr. Tereso Abella                       Freshwater Aquaculture Center (FAC) at CLSU
    Dr. Emanuelle Vera-Cruz                 Freshwater Aquaculture Center (FAC) at CLSU
    Dr. Yolanda Garcia                      WorldFish Center, Philippines Office /
                                            University of the Philippines at Los Baños (UPLB)

German partners
   Prof. Dr. Hermann Waibel                 Leibniz University Hannover
   Ms. Thongporn Tongruksawattana           Leibniz University Hannover
   Mr. Jan Peter Butenhoff                  Leibniz University Hannover

7. Project Description
Description given in the proposal
The objective of this research project is to assess the impact of genetically improved farmed
tilapia (GIFT), including GIFT-derived strains, on productivity, income, food security, and
livelihood of small-scale farmers. The analysis also allows the assessment of the effects of its
adoption on poverty reduction. The Philippines was chosen as a study site because it was the
country where the GIFT development was initiated and implemented. China, on the other hand,
is a major producer of tilapia worldwide. Moreover, the countries took very different paths of
disseminating the technology. While dissemination in the Philippines was carried out mainly by



                                               2

the GIFT foundation, a not for profit organization, in conjunction with the private sector,
dissemination in China was mainly done by government agencies through their breeding
stations and hatcheries.

The specific objectives of the research project are:
   i) To analyze the farm-level impact of the GIFT strain,
   ii) To examine the effect of different dissemination strategies on adoption and impact, and
   iii) To derive the internal rate of return (IRR) to the investment in GIFT development.

For the second objective, the project will evaluate the role of the dissemination channel on the
rate of adoption of the GIFT technology by small-scale versus larger-scale aquaculture farms.
Thus, the potential for increased food security and enhanced livelihoods of poor farmers (i.e. the
equity implications of introducing GIFT) can be assessed.

The major outputs of the project are:
1) A comprehensive impact assessment including a detailed account of the adoption pattern,
   i.e. who are the adopters of the technology and what are the driving forces for adoption, and
2) A report on the effect of different institutional settings on magnitude and distribution of
   impact, i.e. empirical evidence of the benefits of developing the GIFT strain on the producer
   level and in particular assessment of equity implications (e.g. are small-scale or large-scale
   producers benefiting most?) and impact on poverty.

Subsequent changes
The producer surveys conducted under this project in China and in the Philippines showed only
relatively low adoption levels of the GIFT strain at the time of the survey. This reduces the
options for subsequent econometric analysis of the data. Also, the strain names that farmers
provided in many cases did not allow unambiguous conclusions whether or not the breed was of
GIFT origin. Thus we reverted to the following additional measures:
   1) A hatchery follow-up survey was conducted in Region IV in the Philippines (which had a
      very large share, 94%, of unidentified strains) in early 2008 to trace the origin of the
      seed back to the source and thus get a better understanding of the genetic origin of the
      fish cultured. This was possible since farmers were asked about the source of the seed
      used (i.e. they were asked where they purchased the seed). In this way, the information
      obtained from the hatchery survey could be linked with the producer survey. The strain
      data from the producer survey was updated with this additional information. While use
      was made of the farmers’ response for the adoption analysis, at the same time updated
      strain information for the subsequent comparison of (economic) performance of different
      strains was incorporated.
   2) Because the share of pure GIFT strains in the data set was very limited we included the
      additional category of GIFT-derived strains. This category reflects the fact, that GIFT
      was used as breeding material in national breeding programs thus helping to improve
      the overall quality of seed available. We included the “GIFT-derived” category in the
      analysis and compare the performance to the GIFT and non-GIFT groups, respectively.
      However, in cases where the GIFT category had too few observations we merged the
      GIFT and GIFT-derived categories. However, there is an inherent methodological
      challenge since the “level” of GIFT within the GIFT-derived strains is not known and
      most likely highly variable. Thus, this procedure leads to a “watering down” of the GIFT
      effect and might be one reason for the lack of significant differences between GIFT and
      non-GIFT.


                                                3

   3) For the analysis of farm-level adoption of GIFT in the Philippines, Ms Tongruksawattana,
      the junior researcher from Hannover University, made use of the data on history of strain
      adoption (this was recorded back for the past 10 years). This measure was used in order
      to have a sufficiently large group of adopters for the econometric analysis despite the
      low number of producers cultivating GIFT in the survey season. She then identified
      different categories of adopters/non-adopters by also considering the dis-adoption
      behavior (i.e. retainers who continue to adopt versus rejecters who did cultivate the GIFT
      strain in the past but now do not continue this adoption).

   4) In response to the large share of farmers who either did not know the name of the strain
      they were using (and where we could not update the information based on the hatchery
      survey results) or where the strain names given were not unambiguous with regard to
      the presence of GIFT in the breeding line, we introduced a category of “unspecified”. In
      consequence the observations cannot be used to assess the performance of GIFT or
      non-GIFT strains thus de facto reducing the sample size.

Given the relatively low adoption of GIFT in our sample and the challenges in identifying the
respective strains farmers were cultivating, we shifted the attention from the originally planned
comparison and assessment of the GIFT strain towards a better understanding of the national
breeding sector and the challenges of disseminating improved strains. Thus, the outcome and
contribution of this project is an improved understanding of the underlying forces driving or
inhibiting adoption and dissemination. In addition a critical discussion of “lessons learnt” from
the problems faced during the dissemination of the GIFT technology is added. This is
particularly relevant given that GIFT was shown to be a very high potential and successful
technology based on the experimental and on-farm testing results achieved at the end of the
GIFT and DEGITA projects.

Similarly, since GIFT has gone very different ways in the Philippines and in China, the two
countries included in this project, we focus on providing a detailed account of the pathway as
well as the related challenges and limitations rather than a formal comparison to identify the
“best” dissemination channel. Thus, the calculation of rates of return of the GIFT development
was not possible. However the research results clearly identified the pitfalls of the dissemination
of aquaculture technologies (and improved strains in particular) and provided a compilation and
discussion of the lessons learnt both for WorldFish as well as the national partners.


8. Major Research Findings
Given the different state of GIFT adoption and some differences in the type of data available for
the two countries, the major research findings of the project will first be presented for the two
countries separately followed by an overall discussion and assessment of findings in Section 9.

Philippines
The producer survey was conducted in late 2006 and early 2007 in three regions in the
Philippines. We selected major tilapia producing provinces and included some more remote
sites based on the production statistics obtained from the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic
Resources (BFAR), within the selected research areas, municipalities with a large number of
tilapia producers were selected based on lists obtained from the Provincial and Municipal
Agriculture Offices. The selection of producers was then randomized. All interviews were
conducted face-to-face using a structured questionnaire. The questionnaire was pre-tested
together with the enumerators as part of their training and translated into Tagalog to avoid


                                                4

misunderstandings. Completed questionnaires were checked on the site for completeness and
consistency and if necessary taken back to the respective farmer.

The survey in Region IV was coordinated by the local WorldFish Office (with support from the
German student) while CLSU was in charge of the survey in Region II and III. In total, 780 tilapia
producers where interviewed (see IIFET paper for more details).
During the producer survey in the Philippines we found, that:
   •   adoption of pure GIFT is low (only some 6% of the entire sample), though there were
       marked differences between the included research sites (ranging from 16% adoption in
       Region III which is closed to the major national breeding center to only 1% in Region IV).
   •   based on the adoption history of tilapia strains which was recorded in the interviews, the
       peak of GIFT adoption was before 2002.
   •   the GIFT strain was widely used in national breeding programs and around 50% of the
       cultivated strains in our sample were classified as “GIFT-derived”.
   •   especially in Region IV, the identification of strains was a real issue since farmers were
       using (local) names (such as “nilotica”, “tagalong” or “danao”) which do not specify the
       genetic origin of the strain. In this survey area 94% of the observations were classified
       as “unspecified”.
   •   in the hatchery follow-up survey (71 hatchery operators), some of the unspecified strains
       could be identified, but there are still some 70% of remaining “unspecified” observations
       in Region IV and some 28% of “unspecified” strains in the entire sample.
   •   in the conducted adoption analysis, the standard explanatory variables (such as age,
       educational level, farm size, access to extension services) did not sufficiently explain the
       adoption behavior. Thus other factors such as the (local) availability of seed, established
       relationships (trust) between grow-out operators and hatcheries are most likely the major
       driving forces behind the strain adoption decision.
   •   there was no major difference between the farm level performance (in terms of yield and
       profitability) of GIFT and non-GIFT strains. This could either mean that all other strains
       have improved (due to cross-breeding) or GIFT quality has deteriorated over the past
       years. This might explain why farmers are not very concerned about what strain to use.
   •   the realized yield seems to depend much more on the level of inputs (such as feed and
       fertilizer) used rather than the cultivated strain (this needs further quantification).
In addition to the findings derived from the data analysis, the following important insights were
gained during the fieldwork for this project:
   •   Genomar did not have any active satellite hatcheries anymore by the time of the survey,
       which might explain the low adoption of GIFT since seed was simply not available.
   •   the GIFT Foundation is active again since the end of 2005 and trying to “revive” GIFT,
       but with very limited staff capacity and resources. They did however provide GIFT seed
       to some farmers in Region III.
   •   there is a number of national tilapia breeding initiatives which are competing rather than
       collaborating in tilapia improvement efforts each promoting their own strain(s).




                                                5

   •    there is a very large number of (small) hatcheries and middlemen active in the seed
        sector; this results in a lack of transparency and quality control. Farmers can’t assess
        fingerling quality before/while buying.
   •    it seems that poor brood stock management has resulted in deteriorated improved
        strains which might explain why we did not find significant differences between strains.
Further analysis of the data by national partners and the WorldFish team is on-going (focusing
e.g. on production function and technical efficiency analysis). The findings will be incorporated
in the technical report (to be published in late 2008) and scientific papers.

China
The three provinces of Guangdong, Guangxi and Fujian (together accounting for some 75% of
national tilapia production in 2006) were selected as survey sites. Within the provinces, major
tilapia producing counties were selected (with the additional criterion of GIFT presence). Within
counties, farmers were selected randomly. The major limitation for the project work in China
was to not have a full-time staff on the ground overseeing the activities. The involved German
master student was based in Penang and only visited the research sites during the inception trip
together with the project leader (because it was impossible to obtain a research permit for him).
The national counterpart from FFRC was based in Wuxi and only visited the survey sites
occasionally. Pre-testing and enumerator training was conducted by project partners during the
visits to the survey sites. Data collection was conducted by local extension staff (using an
adapted and translated version of the questionnaire developed for the survey in the Philippines)
and was thus more difficult to implement and oversee. Data cleaning and entering were
delayed, since hard copies of the questionnaires had to be send to FFRC in Wuxi. There were
reservations with regard to the quality of data submitted to WorldFish and thus, a major step of
data cleaning was conducted by the German student and all incomplete or inconsistent
observations were eliminated from the sample. This led to a drastic reduction in the sample size
(from 600 surveyed producers a final sample of only 176 observations for all three provinces
was complete enough to be used for the analysis).
During the producer survey in China we found, that:
   •    the adoption of GIFT in the final sample was 15%. The majority of farmers were using
        non-GIFT crossbreeds of O. nilotica and O. aurea (called “AuNi” in China referring to the
        two parent lines) with mainly male offspring.
   •    the three included provinces have considerably different climatic and environmental
        conditions, making cross province comparison questionable. This is a problem especially
        for Guangdong data since there were only two “GIFT” farmers in the sample.
   •    tilapia in the survey area are produced in ponds or reservoirs (21 of the observations
        were in reservoirs i.e. 35% of the final sample in Fujian and 5% in Guangdong). Since
        these are two very different production environments, the sample is further fragmented.
   •    the GIFT farmers had a similar educational level, larger farms, shorter cycle length of
        tilapia production, lower yields and lower production costs as compared to non-GIFT
        producers (as evident from descriptive analysis).
   •    there is a clear linear positive effect of the amount of feed on the final yield (for both
        GIFT and non-GIFT strains).
   •    the production function estimation showed a negative and significant coefficient for the
        GIFT dummy, indicating that GIFT producers obtained lower yields.



                                                6

In addition to the findings derived from the data analysis, the following important insights were
gained during the fieldwork for this project:
   •   when the GIFT strain was first introduced to China in the early 1990s, there was only
       relatively limited testing and dissemination going on since the national partner was part
       of the university and research network rather than the government extension system.
   •   though not formally banned, there is a de facto rule within the government breeding and
       extension sector to not conduct sex reversal of fish fry. This makes the GIFT strain
       unattractive to producers due to the high rate of proliferation and results small fish which
       are very heterogeneous in size.
   •   GIFT was first introduced to the study sites in 1998 but these early introductions reached
       only a small number of farmers. Improved GIFT strains were disseminated in the area
       from 2001 onwards. Only in 2006 was an improved GIFT strain available and did FFRC
       start to use GIFT for cross-breeding with “blue tilapia” (O. aurea) to obtain mainly male
       off-spring and thus avoid sex-reversal or the earlier problem of excessive proliferation.
   •   Genomar has a hatchery facility in Hainan and is producing large amounts of Genomar
       Supreme Tilapia fry which are based on the GIFT strain and sex reversed.
   •   fingerlings/fry are widely traded between provinces and transported over long distances
       (even by air) in China. Thus, the seed market is very competitive and by now dominated
       by the private sector rather than government hatcheries.
A major limitation for the analysis and interpretation of the findings from the China survey is the
small (and uneven) sample size across provinces and production systems. Since there were so
few GIFT adopters, the preconditions for running an econometric adoption analysis were not
met. Also, considering the history and background of GIFT in China, there is a similar problem
as in the Philippines since GIFT seed was not widely available at the time of the survey. Since
the national breeding sector has now focused efforts on incorporating some of the positive traits
of the GIFT strain by crossbreeding, it can be expected that result would be much more positive
if the survey were to be repeated in some 3-5 years time. At the moment, GIFT is a very young
and immature technology in the context of China, since local requirements such as the need to
produce a very large share of male offspring to avoid prolific breeding without applying sex
reversal hormones are not met. This puts the result of the production function analysis in
perspective, which show that GIFT had a negative effect on productivity. In addition, there are
some outstanding data issues for the sample which need to be addressed (e.g. obvious outliers
which do not fit the distribution of yield in the sample). This might affect or change the results.

9. Assessment of Research Findings
It is very surprising at first glance that a technology that has been shown to be as successful as
the GIFT strain in on-farm testing is not used more widespread and that it is not possible to
demonstrate significant benefits based on the producer survey. However, when considering the
history and conditions in the two respective countries, there are a number of reasons which
explain the current status and our findings.
First, in the case of the Philippines, the major problem seems to be the poor management of
brood stock and thus the deterioration of strain quality over time. This problem is aggravated by
a seed producing sector which is overcrowded with small scale hatcheries, nurseries and
middlemen and the lack of accreditation of the actors involved. This makes it very difficult for the
farmer to assess the quality of the seed they are purchasing. Also, there were considerable
problems with the established Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) with Genomar and thus the
further improvement and dissemination of high quality GIFT seed was interrupted and the brand


                                                 7

name damaged. This does not allow the conclusion however, that PPP is not a suitable model
in disseminating aquaculture technologies in general but rather points to the pitfalls that can
occur when setting up such a partnership.

In China, the technology did not even reach farmers on a larger scale when the strain was first
transferred to the country. This had partly to do with the institutional and personal characteristics
of the national partner involved in the GIFT and DEGITA project but also with the general notion
that sex reversal (which is routinely conducted for the GIFT strain and other improved strains in
other countries) is not acceptable. The national breeding sector branched off into different
directions to address the problem of early maturity and prolific reproduction by concentrating the
breeding efforts on the production of genetically male strains. Only recently has the GIFT strain
been brought back to their attention (and have more GIFT fish for breeding been transferred to
China) and it seems that initial breeding efforts have yielded good success. However, it is too
early to assess those efforts and it will take another 3-5 years before the impact of those “GIFT-
derived” strains can be evaluated on the farm-level.

Thus, there is no point comparing the two different dissemination channels (public player versus
private institution), as both are not successful (at the moment) for the dissemination of GIFT for
entirely different reasons. This does not mean however, that they are entirely wrong or
unsuitable strategies. There are very important lessons to be learnt on how to disseminate
improved strains to ensure the technology benefits the farmers (see section 12).

10. Know-How Transfer
A number of different types of knowledge transfer took place within the project. First, the work
was a learning experience for the involved team, which benefitted especially from the round of
expert meetings during the inception visits in each country. The national staff was actively
involved at all stages of the project and knows about all aspects of the study. One additional
level of know-how transfer was the involvement of German students who not only learnt about
the technical and methodological aspects of the project, but also experienced living and working
in a developing country and within an international research community. Finally, the findings and
in particular the lessons learnt will be presented to a wider international audience in the form of
a technical report published in the WorldFish publication series as well as during conferences
and in the form of scientific journal papers.

11. Training (if applicable)
Training was not a major component of this small-scale impact assessment study. However, a
number of formal and informal training sessions were held with national partners on the survey
methodology as well as the process of designing, pre-testing and implementing a survey.
Moreover, national partners benefitted from joint data analysis, a session on methods of
adoption analysis and paper writing with (and back-stopping provided by) the WorldFish team.
Finally, the involvement of two master students was a considerable training investment in terms
of time spent by the project leader, national partners and the senior German project partner.

12. Lessons learnt
In terms of implementing and running the project, the data collection supported by the master
student and/or national partners at the site worked very well. To avoid problems with the survey
implementation and the data quality as experienced in China in future studies, a fulltime person
on the ground is highly recommended at least for the entire survey period.



                                                 8

It was beneficial to have an interdisciplinary team involved in the study, and the design and set-
up benefited from the institutional memory which still existed within WorldFish.
The major lesson learnt, however, is on how to best deliver research findings or products to the
end users. Based on our findings, it seems essential that in order to successfully disseminate
improved strains a strong national breeding sector is present which has the capacity to maintain
the purity and quality of the strain in question. Brood stock management is more complex and
difficult for fish than it is for livestock (e.g. the problem of tagging individuals). Alternatively (or
additionally), a well implemented system of continued support and monitoring can ensure the
successful management and dissemination of the technology. If an improved strain is merely
handed over to national partners, the chances of a sustained benefit seem rather low.
The findings and conclusions from this research will be presented to WorldFish colleagues and
management in an internal research seminar which is scheduled as a session within the “Food
for Thought” series and will take place on 11th September 2008.

13. Future Research Needs
Based on the results of the study, there are a number of future research needs that have been
identified, both for the GIFT strain in particular, but also for other (similar) technologies in
general. With regard to the GIFT strain, it would be interesting to check on the genetic content
of the strains at the hatchery level and breeding centers and assess how and where quality
deterioration happens. This would aid an improved quality control system and counter measures
could be installed. With regard to the compiled data sets and information, further analysis is
worthwhile and in fact on-going (e.g. production function estimation and efficiency analysis for
Philippines data set). Some of this will be completed within a short timeframe and can still be
incorporated in the forthcoming technical report to be published as booklet within the WorldFish
Technical Report series.
In terms of more general research needs, there is a burning question of how to design and
implement better strategies to sustain and disseminate research findings (such as improved
strains) in developing countries. This is extremely relevant for the international agricultural
research community in general, since the question of how best to sustainably transfer improved
technologies to the field is still partly unresolved. Also, for future impact studies, a close
monitoring of development and release of technologies in order to test and demonstrate impact
needs to be designed and implemented. Since funds and resources – especially for impact
assessment – are scarce, this requires a smart and pragmatic approach that meets the rigorous
standards of the scientific community while keeping involved time and funds to a minimum.




                                                   9

14. Publications, Papers and Reports


Papers and Reports
Pemsl, D., O. Chen, T. Tongruksawattana, Y. Garcia, E. Vera-Cruz, T. Abella, and H. Waibel
  (2008). Adoption and farm-level impact of genetically improved farmed tilapia (GIFT) in the
  Philippines. Paper presented at IIFET 2008, 22 – 25 July, Vietnam.
Vera-Cruz, E., T. Abella (2007). Farm level impact of genetically improved farmed tilapia in
   Regions 2 and 3, Philippines. Survey Report submitted to WorldFish in June 2007. 14 pp.
Tongruksawattana, T., H. Waibel, D. Pemsl (2007). Explaining adoption of tilapia strains: a case
   study of cage culture in the Philippines. Draft paper, Leibniz University Hannover, 20 pp.
Tongruksawattana, T., and D. Pemsl (2006). Assessing the farm-level impact of genetically
   improved farmed tilapia (GIFT) in China and the Philippines - Inception Report – Philippines.
   September 2006, Project Report, 29 pp.
Butenhoff, J., and D. Pemsl (2006). Assessing the farm-level impact of genetically improved
   farmed tilapia (GIFT) in China and the Philippines - Inception Report – China. November
   2006, Project report, 26 pp.


Theses
Butenhoff, J.P. (2008). Analysis of the productivity effects of Genetically Improved Farmed
   Tilapia (GIFT) in Southern China. Master thesis, Leibniz University Hannover. Submitted on
   17th June 2008, 100 pp.
Tongruksawattana, T. (2007). Technology adoption in aquaculture in developing countries:
   genetically improved tilapia in the Philippines. Master thesis, Leibniz University Hannover,
   Submitted on 5th May 2007. 147 pp.


Conference presentations
Pemsl, D., O. Chen, T. Tongruksawattana, Y. Garcia, E. Vera-Cruz, T. Abella, and H. Waibel
  (2008). Adoption and farm-level impact of genetically improved farmed tilapia (GIFT) in the
  Philippines. Paper presented at IIFET 2008, 22 – 25 July, Vietnam.
Pemsl, D., Tongruksawattana, T., and Waibel, H. (2007): Technology Adoption in Aquaculture in
  Developing Countries: Genetically Improved Tilapia in the Philippines. Poster presentation,
  Tropentag, October 9-11, 2007, Witzenhausen, Germany.




                                              10

