"x"
"1" "   Worldﬁsh, the Government and other key partners come together to strengthen their
         commitment to reducing malnutrition across the State of Odisha, India



   Published on: April 29, 2021, Submitted by Arun Padiyar Panemangalore on: March 11, 2020, Reporting year: 2020




The approval of the inclusion of ﬁsh and ﬁsh based products in Supplementary Nutrition Program of the State of Odisha, under
Integrated Child Development Support scheme of Department of Women and Child Development and Mission Shakti is a
commendable policy decision taken by the Government for reducing malnutrition menace. The Empowerment of Women through
self-help groups in the production of ﬁsh and ﬁsh based products is another supportive policy decision in ensuring supply of
nutritious ﬁsh and income generation.
"
"2" "                                                    Fisherwoman in Odisha, India




State level International Women’s Day was celebrated at the Loka Seva Bhavan, Bhubaneswar, Odisha on 8th March 2020. On this
occasion, Honourable Chief Minister of Odisha, Mr. Naveen Patnaik has launched Odisha Nutrition Strategy. The Department of
Women and Child Development and Mission Shakti has developed a strategy for transforming nutrition outcomes in 125 identiﬁed
blocks of the state.

WorldFish is an invited member of the Technical Advisory Group on Nutrition under this department, with the role of advising on
supplementary nutrition program under the Integrated Child Development Support scheme (ICDS) of the Government. The
Department has recently approved the piloting of ﬁsh and ﬁsh based products’ inclusion in supplementary nutrition programs for
children above 3 years, adolescent girls and pregnant and lactating women in selected blocks of the state in technical
collaboration with WorldFish.


              Naveen Patnaik.


Mission Shakti is one of the successful programmes of government since 2001. The state government provides ﬁnancial support
to the SHGs to encourage rural women to take up various livelihood activities. Fish farming has been included as one
the livelihood programs during 2018-19. This is a convergence scheme involving three departments namely, Mission Shakti,
Fisheries & Animal Resources and, Panchayati Raj & Drinking Water with technical support from WorldFish.

th November 2020 for achieving the desired nutritional outcomes through pilot inclusion of ﬁsh and ﬁsh based products in
Supplementary Nutrition Program (SNP) of the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) of the Government.

The collaboration, which will focus on various technical inputs, aims at providing livelihoods opportunities through ﬁsh activities
for over 60,000 women. The economic empowerment activities implemented in conjunction with the nutrition program will
contribute towards reaching the nutrition goals for 1.61 million children in the age group of 3-6 years, 2.25 million adolescent girls
and 0.72 million pregnant and lactating women across the State.




The commitment to the policy decision is further strengthened by a speciﬁc budget allocation to Nutrition - one of its kind
nutrition budget in India - and the signing of the MoU provide a way forward for scaling the inclusion of ﬁsh in Anganwadi ICDS
"
"3" "Supplementary Nutrition Program of Odisha Government which involves 6 million people (children, adolescent girls, pregnant and
lactating women) from vulnerable communities. Also, it would provide ﬁsheries and aquaculture based income generation
livelihoods opportunities for thousands of Women organised under self help groups nurtured by the Department of Mission Shakti
of the Government of Odisha.

The collaboration will focus on:

    1. Train and empower 6,000 Women Self Help Groups (WSHGs) involving 60,000 women in nutrition-sensitive ﬁsh production
       systems in Gram Panchayat tanks and 10 WSHGs involving 100 women for ﬁsh processing through small-scale home
       industry set-up and linking them to the market
    2. Design and develop age-speciﬁc ﬁsh based products for ICDS beneﬁciaries from small indigenous species sourced from
       capture ﬁsheries
    3. Collaborate in piloting the inclusion of ﬁsh and ﬁsh based products in government sponsored ICDS Supplementary
       Nutrition Programme (SNP) through 50 Anganwadi centers.
    4. Conduct national and international study tours and brain storming sessions for key oﬃcials of the Department to share
       the experiences on inclusion of ﬁsh for nutritional beneﬁts of the vulnerable section of the communities
    5. Technically assist the Department in preparing feasibility report on inclusion of ﬁsh in SNP to 1.61 million children in the
       age group of 3-6 years; 2.25 million adolescent girls and 0.72 million pregnant & lactating women across the state
    6. Technically assist the Department for inclusion of ﬁsh on large-scale basis under ICDS supplementary feeding programme,
       if decided by the Government
    7. Support the Department in creating awareness among 137,964 ICDS functionaries across districts on beneﬁts of ﬁsh-
       based nutrition through diﬀerent SBCC materials and Nutrition Protagonist TikiMausi
    8. Technically assist the Department in disseminating the importance of ﬁsh based nutrition in 1000 days of life in 125 hard
       to reach projects under SOPAN
    9. Assist the Department in designing and executing proper Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) of various activities
       under the MoU and for documentation of various activities and outcomes of the program in order to share the learnings
       with wider stakeholders for further developments / investments at scale along with the agreed impact pathway.




Stage of Maturity and Sphere of inﬂuence

        Stage of Maturity: Stage 1

        Contributions in sphere of inﬂuence:
        2.1.1 - Increased availability of diverse nutrient-rich foods
        B.1.1 - Gender-equitable control of productive assets and resources




Acknowledgement

This work was undertaken as part of the CGIAR Research Program on Fish Agri-Food Systems (FISH) led by WorldFish. The
program is supported by contributors to the CGIAR Trust Fund. Funding support for this work was provided by the USAID as part of
the Scaling nutrition-sensitive ﬁsheries technologies and integrated approaches through partnership in Odisha project.

For more details , please contact the India project manager Arun Padiyar at A.Padiyar@cgiar.org.




Projects

        Fisheries and Animal Resources Development (Program with Department of Fisheries, Odisha)

        Scaling innovative, nutrition-sensitive ﬁsheries technologies and integrated approaches through partnerships in Odisha,
        India can improve food and nutrition security
"
"4" "CRPs & Partners




CRP on Fish Agri-Food Systems
            - FISH




       WorldFish - WF              Fisheries and Animal         Department of Women & Child
                                  Resources Development           Development and Mission
                                    Department of the            Shakti - WCD & MS Odisha
                                  Government of Odisha -
                                          F&ARD




References

      USAID _Scaling nutrition-sensitive ﬁsheries technologies and integrated approaches through partnership in Odisha Annual
      Report Oct 2018-Sept 2019.

      USAID IPP Funded Project - Scaling nutrition-sensitive ﬁsheries technologies and integrated approaches through
      partnership in Odisha. Semi-annual report Oct 2018-March 2019.

      News Swasth India, 20 February 2020. In A First, To Tackle Malnutrition, Odisha Introduces A Separate Nutrition Budget

      Vishnumurthy Mohan Chadag, Baishnaba Ratha. (15/9/2020). USAID _Scaling nutrition-sensitive ﬁsheries technologies and
      integrated approaches through partnership in Odisha Annual Report Oct 2019-Sept 2020.

      Megi Cullhaj, Andressa Gutierrez. (16/4/2021). 2020 FISH CRP Annual Report Project Brief: Scaling innovative, nutrition
      sensitive ﬁsheries technologies and integrated approaches through partnership in Odisha, India.

      AniNews, 11 November 2020. Odisha signs MoU with WorldFish to provide ﬁsh in supplementary nutrition programme.

      Hindustan Times, 11 November 2020. Odisha to introduce ﬁsh in nutrition programme of children and pregnant women

      Odisha Bytes, 10 November 2020. Odisha Govt Ties Up With WorldFish For Inclusion Of Fish In Supplementary Nutrition
      Programme

      Megi Cullhaj, Andressa Gutierrez. (16/4/2021). Fisheries and Animal Resources Development (Program with Department of
      Fisheries, Odisha) - Project brief (April 2020—March 2021).




Keywords

      human nutrition

      nutrition sensitive aquaculture and ﬁsheries
"
"5" "      inclusion of ﬁsh in 1000 day approach

      women shgs in ﬁsh farming




Countries

      India




About the author

                  Arun Padiyar Panemangalore is Project Manager at WorldFish - WF.




Related Blogs/Outcome Stories




 The adoption of Aquaculture   USD 7.92 Million grant by the         FISH supports the        The successful nutrition
         Best Ma...                      Worl...                     digitalisation in...           results in...




   FISH research helps the        FISH research activities in     WorldFish assisted the      Technical collaboration of
       Government ...                     India p...                Government o...                  WorldFis...




  Odisha Government Orders      Investment approved for the     The adoption of aquaculture
        on emergen...                   genetic...                      Best Ma...
"
